VER 008    MARG+1,66


Small-C DISKDOC:
A REPAIR AND MAINTENANCE UTILITY

By Egil Kvaleberg, N-4060 Kleppe, Norway.

Appeared in the Dr. Dobb's Journal #66, April 1982.



       Diskdoc is a utility that, like its name implies, is
intended for repair and maintainance of diskettes and other
random access mass storage media. Tasks accomplished include:
 i     Taking backups (also in a single drive system).
 ii    Verifying data integrity.
 iii   Restoring previously deleted files (by manual patching).
 iv    Repairing faulty sectors.
 v     Debugging disk driver routines and controller hardware.
 vi    Debugging file systems.

       Diskdoc has been in frequent use for about two years now
(including a one year assembly language childhood), and has
proved a useful companion when exploring the oh-so-vulnerable
world of diskettes. 
       The version listed runs under CP/M, but adapting
to other operating systems will probably not be found too
difficult a task to accomplish. As explained in the listing, te
program is written to be compiled by the Ron Cain Small-C
compiler. Small-C is smaller than standard C, and conoisseurs of
the C language will find some of the constructions used quite
primitive. If you prepare the program for a richer dialect of C,
you might consider rewriting parts of the program. Except for
efficiency, perhaps, there is little reason to take the bother
since Small-C is a true subset of C.



TALKING TO DISKDOC

       Diskdoc always tries to give self explanatory prompts. The
default value can usually be displayed by typing <cr> once. If
you should enter an inappropriate character, diskdoc simply
refuses to echo it. Entries may be corrected by using the
backspace key. A final <cr> will, as usual, end the input line.



THE COMMAND LEVEL

       Starting up, diskdoc will enter the command level,
requesting a single letter command:

 a     Adapt to terminal type. You will asked to enter the
       character that will move the cursor home. An escape
       sequence is acceptable. This is all that is required to
       adapt diskdoc to virtually any video terminal. It is
       assumed that the width of the screen is 80 characters.

 b     Backup entire diskette, on a sector-by-sector basis. You
       will be asked to enter the source and destination drive
       names (a-h). It is crucial to double-check the direction
       of data flow. The same drive might be assigned as both
       source and destination, in which case diskdoc will request
       a diskette change whenever necessary during the copy
       process. If an error is detected in the source diskette,
       diskdoc will ask whether the sector read operation should
       be retried, the error ignored, or the backup aborted. It
       is recommended to retry a few times before declaring a
       sector unrecoverable, thereby filtering out intermittently
       occuring errors. If desired, backup can be aborted by
       typing any character.

 c     Compare the contents of two diskettes. Every discrepancy
       will be reported. Abort by typing any character.

 e     Exit. You will be prompted to insert a system diskette
       before leaving.

 p     Patch. Look at and optionally patch selected sectors. For
       patch subcommands, see below.

 s     Scan diskette by reading every sector. The test will
       quickly locate any sector that doesn't give a proper CRC.
       The test might be interrupted by typing any character.

 t     Test diskette. A test pattern will be written, and the
       entire diskette will then be read back and compared. The
       write operation may be omitted. The command provides
       useful verification of disk controller hardware and
       software operation.

 z     Zero diskette. The specified number of tracks will be
       erased by filling the EBCDIC character 'V' (0E5H).



PATCH COMMANDS
     
 <sp>  Move the cursor to the next byte.

 <bs>  Move the cursor to the previous byte.

 <cr>  Move the cursor down, i.e. 16 bytes forward.

 <hex> To patch, enter the new hex byte directly. After having
       entered the first digit, a <bs> will "undo" it. After
       having entered the second, the cursor will move to the
       next byte.

 '     To enter an ascii character, type a single quote followed
       by the desired character.

 l     Read the logically following sector. This command is
       useful where a mapping between physical and logical
       sectors exists, such as in standard CP/M single density
       diskettes.

 n     Read the next sequential sector. The next track is
       accessed if the end of the current one is reached.

 q     Quit patch mode.

 r     Re-read. Read the current sector once again.

 s     Shift the rest of the sector one bit-position to the
       right. This command is useful when attempting to repair
       sectors where the controller has lost a few bits here and
       there.

 t     Select a new track and/or sector.

 w     Write back the current sector. Remember to use this
       command after having made any changes, since no automatic
       write is performed.



REGARDING THE CP/M VERSION

       The CP/M version, as listed, will adapt to the physical
characteristics of the drive (track and sector counts). This is
accomplished by reading the disk parameter block returned by the
BIOS drive select call. CP/M version 2.0 or better is required.
For drives using sector blocking/deblocking schemes, the sectors
that diskdoc works with will not correspond directly to the
physical sectors.



ADAPTING TO OTHER OPERATING SYSTEMS AND/OR COMPILERS

       All implementation depandant functions are containded in
the file "ddocsys.c". These functions are all very low-level, and
thus very non-standard. You will have to write these functions
yourself, since no C runtime libraries will support them. If
automatic size adaptation and/or logical to physical sector
mapping aren't required, the functions seldrv() and lnext(),
respectively, can be considerably simplifed.
